age-piv-p256 recipient stanza (#31)
C2SP/C2SP: age-piv-p256.md

ABNF syntax follows [RFC
5234](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc5234.html) and [RFC
7405](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7405.html) and references the
core rules in RFC 5234, Appendix B.1.

The base64 encoding used throughout is the standard Base 64 encoding
specified in [RFC 4648](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc4648.html),
Section 4, without `=` padding characters (sometimes referred to as
"raw" or "unpadded" base64). Encoders MUST generate canonical base64
according to RFC 4648, Section 3.5, and decoders MUST reject
non-canonical encodings and encodings ending with `=` padding
characters.

`||` denotes concatenation. `0x` followed by two hexadecimal characters
denotes a byte value in the 0-255 range.

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
"SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
"OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in [BCP
14](https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/bcp14) [RFC
2119](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc2119.html) [RFC
8174](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8174.html) when, and only when,
they appear in all capitals, as shown here.

## Recipient stanza

> A piv-p256 recipient stanza has three arguments.

Reviewer: If we make other changes, we should drop "piv" from the name.

Maybe tagged-p256? Or hw-p256?

I assume @Foxboron could use it for age-plugin-tpm, too.

I wonder if we should standardize the recipient (not identity) format, and add native support to age(1) so that one doesn't need the plugin to encrypt to PIV/TPM/SE/any other P-256 identity.

/cc @str4d

Reviewer 2: I can probably use this, I wasn't aware of this PR work when I originally wrote `age-plugin-tpm`.

Author: Native support sounds neat.

- You don't need to install a plugin to encrypt to these plugins. For encrypting to a different person, it feels odd that you need to install `age-plugin-se` even if you don't have an Apple device. It also avoids the plugin discovery problem where you need to explain which plugin people have to download to encrypt a message to you.
- For `age-plugin-se`, I could drop all cross-platform support, since the parts that don't involve encryption are only useful on macOS. I can imagine there are other hardware encryption plugins that don't make sense on all platforms.
- It hides information about which type of token corresponds to a certain recipient
- If there's a backwards-incompatible change now, only half of the existing state machines need to be updated (the easy half)

    -> piv-p256 8u8pZg Aqa5k2Tm/BJGTzCno1W29dWaWBHkFchOztcIZ7aQo0Ca
    CXE0N0KMI0BUE5WaYTLOxYv7aHB/5IQpAZKsk2C/yjU

1.  The first argument is the fixed string `piv-p256`.

2.  The second argument is the base-64 encdoded tag of the recipient,
    consisting of the first 4 bytes of the SHA-256 hash of the
    recipient:

>          tag = SHA-256(recipient)[0..4]

Author: I was wondering if the tag should be salted, to hide relations between stanzas (in different files) for the same recipient

Reviewer: Hmm what do you have in mind?

Maybe `x = CSPRNG(4); tag = x || HMAC(recipient, x)[0..4]` so that only someone who knows the recipient can link files?

That is indeed a nice step forward in privacy! Might be worth making a backwards-incompatible change. @str4d, what do you think?

Reviewer 3: I think it's pretty common to just use the x-coordinate, similar to X25519

Reviewer: > I think it's pretty common to just use the x-coordinate, similar to X25519

For the shared ECDH output yes, but the input is usually either a compressed or an uncompressed point, no? x-coordinate-only ECDH like in X25519 is very uncommon on P-256. (I recently surveyed a bunch of ECDH and ECIES implementations while designing the crypto/ecdh.)

Reviewer 3: Which spec uses a SEC1-encoded point as the input?

TLS 1.3 (by way of IEEE1363) uses the x-coordinate, for example:

https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc8446#section-7.4.2

> [7.4.2](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc8446#section-7.4.2).  Elliptic Curve Diffie-Hellman
>
>   For secp256r1, secp384r1, and secp521r1, ECDH calculations (including
>   parameter and key generation as well as the shared secret
>   calculation) are performed according to [[IEEE1363](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc8446#ref-IEEE1363)] using the
>   ECKAS-DH1 scheme with the identity map as the key derivation function
>   (KDF), so that the shared secret is the x-coordinate of the ECDH
>   shared secret elliptic curve point represented as an octet string.

Reviewer 3: My bad, I was originally trying to reply to [this comment](https://github.com/C2SP/C2SP/pull/31/files/4c6c0ad4a6993a83d635a2e74602d4128c3e9ce3#r1305437492)

Author: > Maybe `x = CSPRNG(4); tag = x || HMAC(recipient, x)[0..4]` so that only someone who knows the recipient can link files?

That's indeed what I had in mind, except I was thinking of putting `x` in a separate stanza argument instead of concatenating it (to avoid a custom split)

Reviewer 4: Is there a reason to prefer this construction instead of `HMAC(recipient, ephemeral share)[0..4]`?

Author: IANAC, but sounds nice and simple to me.

3.  The third argument is the base64-encoded ephemeral share computed by
    the recipient implementation as follows:

         ephemeral secret = read(CSPRNG, 32)

>          ephemeral share = P256(ephemeral secret, basepoint)

Reviewer: "P256" is not a well-defined ECDH operation the way X25519 is.

We should define it somewhere as scalar multiplication over P-256, with SEC 1 point decoding and encoding. (Assuming that's what we are doing? But then why is the third argument 32 bytes?)

Reviewer 3: My comments about using the x-coordinate for ECDH with P-256 (and really all the NIST P-curves) were supposed to be in reply to this comment. I guess I must've clicked the wrong one in my previous replies.

Reviewer: Replying to https://github.com/C2SP/C2SP/pull/31#discussion_r1305720851.

The ECDH output is the x-coordinate. The ECDH input (that is, the third stanza argument here) is `0x04 || x || y`, which is SEC 1. 

https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc8446#section-4.2.8.2

    A new ephemeral secret MUST be generated for each stanza and each
    file.

The body of the recipient stanza is computed by the recipient
implementation as

    salt = ephemeral share || recipient
    info = "piv-p256"
    shared secret = P256(ephemeral secret, recipient)

>     wrap key = HKDF-SHA-256(ikm = shared secret, salt, info)

Reviewer: If we make other backward-incompatible changes, we should swap salt and info here. HKDF is... very theoretically documented, and this is a mistake I made in the original design. It doesn't have practical consequences, and I think one can prove the security of the current design, but it makes applying more sophisticated proofs annoying.

    body = ChaCha20-Poly1305(key = wrap key, plaintext = file key)

where the ChaCha20-Poly1305 nonce is fixed as 12 0x00 bytes.

The identity implementation MUST ignore any stanza that does not have
`piv-p256` as the first argument, and MUST otherwise reject any stanza
that has more or less than three arguments, or where the second argument
is not a canonical encoding of a 4-byte value, or the third argument is
not a canonical encoding of a 32-byte value. It MUST check that the body
length is exactly 32 bytes before attempting to decrypt it.

The identity implementation MUST ignore any stanza with a tag for which
it does not have any corresponding secret.

The identity implementation computes the shared secret as follows:

    shared secret = P256(identity, ephemeral share)

> If the shared secret is all 0x00 bytes, the identity implementation MUST
> abort.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the shared secret is the point at infinity, the identity implementation
MUST abort.
```

The identity is going to be represented differently by different libraries, and often not as a long string of 0x00.
